[Music]
thank you so much well first of all I
want to thank the sanctuary for having
here tonight so I obviously come from
the independent media world I believe in
it very strongly I sort of got my start
in journalism when I I quit a straight
newspaper because they wouldn't let me
write the way I wanted to and I ended up
so starting and Coe starting and funding
a newspaper in Moscow Russia for six
years
and then after that I tried to start a
paper up in Buffalo it didn't go so well
but I'm a strong believer that
independent media's is greatly needed
and that there's an enormous corrupting
influence when you mix big money and big
media and it's actually fortuitous that
I'm here to talk about in st. cloud
president because this book is actually
quite a lot about the media and what
happens when things go wrong with the
major media and it a lot of this book is
about how developments that have been
sort of in the run in the works for a
long time in the commercial news be
media led to the election of Donald
Trump there's been there have been
revolutionary changes in our business
and I think a lot of people who don't
follow the media probably aren't aware
of a lot of these things and that's
really what I want to talk about tonight
largely is the are things that the
ordinary person doesn't really know but
what's going on in this business and how
those things have led to some of the
political changes that we are
unfortunately living through today when
I was a kid and when I'm sure a lot of
the people in this audience when they
were kids they were all
three networks ABC CBS NBC three major
networks and when those three networks
agreed on a thing and that's what a fact
was and everybody knew what was true and
what wasn't or at least they agreed on
what they thought was true wasn't it and
the country was able to have a dialogue
with each other because there was a
common set of facts that everybody was
debating but a little over a decade ago
with the growth of the internet on the
one hand and some rather conspicuous
failures in terms of factual accuracy by
major news organizations on the other
the public started to lose confidence in
this old sort of monopolistic news media
system and they started to consume the
news in a different way instead of
letting reporters tell them what was
true and what wasn't they started going
online and deciding for themselves what
was true and factual reality sort of
stopped being this thing that was
dictated from on high and became
something that people could essentially
shop for if you didn't agree with the
way things were portrayed and the
quote-unquote mainstream media you could
go online and seek out your own version
of the truth and people became reality
shoppers on both sides of the political
spectrum and we started to see the rise
of a lot of conspiratorial movements and
I needed to go into what the what those
are but people will probably probably
familiar with them and many years ago
about a decade ago in fact I wrote a
book about this this phenomenon and I
worried a lot about where all this was
headed the book was called the great
derangement and a lot of what that book
was about was sort of this breakdown and
trust in the traditional media and what
that would mean for politics going
forward and one of the things I said was
that we were entering an era where
politics would be less a fight over
policy and more a fight over information
the candidate would be able to sell the
most attractive version of reality would
be the one
would be the most successful and I
wasn't thinking of Donald Trump back
then Donald Trump wasn't thinking of
Donald Trump back then this was strictly
a feeling about where politics is headed
that it was it was headed to a place
where it was this dangerous place where
voters couldn't agree anymore on on what
the terms of the debate were and I
thought even back then if somebody could
come along who was clued in to this boot
this very strange dynamic of what we now
kind of in the press refer to as the pet
post factual era that that person would
be very very successful and Donald Trump
ended up being that person and he
upended a lot of the traditional
formulas for how you win elections in
this country and some of those things
actually weren't entirely negative there
were a lot of bad things about how how
elections were run in this country and
they've changed forever not necessarily
in a good way but that doesn't mean in
the old way was good either
in the old days in America the roadmap
to success and presidential elections
was really pretty simple whoever raised
the most money won almost 95% of the
time in national elections and that was
for a variety of reasons among other
things because the raising of a lot of
money was a signal to the political
establishment which included news
reporters who covered political media
that a person who raised a lot of money
had the approval of the political
establishment of the country and that
person had therefore would therefore
earn the approval of the news media and
would get positive news coverage so it
turned into a very simple formula raise
money get good press buy commercials and
then win that was really the the the
formula for winning elections in this
country for decades and decades and
decades Trump sort of turned this
formula on its head he bypassed all
those ideas about how you're supposed to
win elections and instead he kind of
made running against that reality part
of his act
and since the press was an intimate part
of that old formula of how people got
elected he also ran against the media as
well and he was extremely effective in
doing that and the the public's hatred
of the news media and their belief in us
as a corrupted part of the political
establishment was a huge key to Trump's
own success his own problem in selling
himself as an accessible person because
we were less accessible than Donald
Trump was because the public hated us
more than they hated New York
billionaires like Donald Trump he was
able to present himself as sort of a
quote-unquote common man but here I sort
of want to back up a little bit and talk
about presidential campaigning and
generally how it worked and some of the
things that Trump pointed out and talked
about on the campaign trail and some of
the things that were affected effective
for him um I've covered now four
presidential elections for Rolling Stone
and I was in sort of a unique position
to watch how it works there are a couple
things I got to talk about here about
how presidential campaigning works the
few things a lot of people don't know
one thing is that the people who are on
the campaign plane or quote-unquote on
the bus has anyone here read the book
the boys on the bus a few people right
so that's sort of the generic term the
reporters used for the people who who
travel with the candidates in the press
corps that's that's we call it on the
bus right and what do you what is true
about on the people on the bus is that
it's a very select group of people and
notably there's basically no independent
or alternative media in that crew why is
that people don't really think about
this but it's true the reason is it's
just too expensive
covering presidential election campaigns
is an incredibly expensive affair it's
complicated but basically the in order
to travel with the with the candidates
the campaigns charge the press they
charter their own airplanes the Charter
their own hotels and then they charge
this enormous markup for everybody to
travel with them and so just to give you
an example my
trip with Donald Trump was a three-day
trip and my bill was over $12,000 so if
you think about that that automatically
excludes a whole class of people who
could never ever travel with with
presidential campaigns there only a
certain kind of reporter is going to be
there and only within that subset of
people there's only a small small group
of people who can travel every day for
weeks and weeks and weeks and months and
months on end so it's only that specific
small subset of sort of corporate funded
media that's on on the plane of those
people the schedule for reporters has
gotten drastically different in the last
twelve to sixteen years back in the 70s
and 80s newspaper reporters who traveled
on the plane the toughest schedule they
usually had was to file maybe at most
once a day you had to write one article
a day if you're on the plane when the
internet came along that changed people
who work for the major dailies suddenly
had to not only write stories for the
print edition but they had to do two
three four five website updates a day
and the people who worked for the cable
news stations instead of doing one
report for the 6 o'clock news broadcast
or the 11 o'clock broadcast they were
doing 5 6 7 8 9 hits a day and they were
constantly constantly working and if
anybody's ever read about cults like
ouch in Rico or anything like that one
of the things that they tell you is that
the working people constantly and
keeping them sleep-deprived is a way of
sapping their will and and reducing
their ability to think critically and
this is something that happens
absolutely on the campaign trail a
typical schedule for a reporter and also
for the politicians interestingly enough
especially when you get into the second
half of a presidential campaign is you
leave a hotel at 5:30 or 6:00 in the
morning you will follow the candidate
you'll be writing constantly as soon as
the candidates
as anything you start writing your story
at the end of every event they heard you
into a little room called the filing
room you do your work you go from you go
back to a bus you go onto a plane you
repeat the process three or four times
and you don't get to your hotel until 11
or 12 o'clock that night and then you
repeat it all over again and for most
people their writing or reporting pretty
much constantly from the time they wake
up in the morning till the time they go
to sleep and then they're waking up
again the next day at 6 o'clock and that
was pretty much everybody in the plane
who covers who covered presidential
elections except me because as a
magazine writer and there are very few
magazine writers who regularly cover
presidential campaigns my deadline was
once every six weeks every two months
and so they would heard all the
reporters into these filing rooms and
while everybody else sitting there
furiously clacking away I would be doing
nothing in fact the first time I went on
the on these trips I actually got in
trouble with some of the other reporters
because I was too loudly flipping the
pages of a Sports Illustrated at another
stop in Houston they busted me for using
or having a Rubik's Cube which they
found annoying so for actually two or
three election cycles
I had oceans of time where I would just
sit watching how how the press operated
and how elections operated and I was
essentially sort of commanded not to
make a sound and just sit there for a
long time and of course I took notes
during the events but in an interview
people but for a lot of the time I just
sat there and i had unlike everybody
else i had a lot of time to think about
what is it we're actually doing what is
campaigning what does the how does the
campaign trail work
what is this activity we're actually
engaged in and it's a lot weirder than
we think if you actually sit down and
think about it one of the things i
started to think about never there's
sort of five observations i want to get
to but one of them is about the
financial dynamic
the plane most reporters don't think
about it but there are two sets of
people in the plane there's the
politicians who are in the front of the
plane and it's interesting how it sort
of geographically separated separated
this way the politicians the politicians
aides the the donors the pollsters
they're up in the front and they have a
very simple financial arrangement they
get paid a lot of money by big corporate
donors and it's a pretty obvious pretty
cool
quid pro quo there they get a lot of
money and in return they were going to
at some point deliver some policy favors
down the line now in the back of the
plane is us the news media and we have a
completely different financial dynamic
we're all trying to get ratings eyeballs
Hits subscriptions and we're trying to
impress advertisers by racking up
statistics along those lines so the
there's a tendency there's a dynamic
that starts to develop and then in the
plane we're reporters whether they like
it or not whether they're conscious of
it or not they will unconsciously
eventually start to gravitate towards
candidates who are entertaining because
candidates who can help them achieve
their financial mission and make their
editors happy will make their lives
easier and their lives are tough already
again the schedule is really really hard
so you're looking for angles that you
don't have to fight with your editor
about you just want to write something
that you know is going to go through the
first try
and so reporters in the plane gravitate
whether they know it or not towards the
people who are good with the media who
are easy on television who are who don't
have who aren't too dry if you go back
in time and look at media descriptions
of people like Dennis Kucinich and even
John Kerry but particularly Kucinich Ron
Paul is another one you'll see a lot of
descriptions like bookish professorial
and they don't they always mean it as a
negative when they're saying these
things and and the the heavies raid sort
of sort of a code that they use to try
to describe people who aren't
entertaining whereas the candidates who
are good in front of the camera and who
are entertaining they get all these
descriptors like warm nuanced relaxed
and anyway there's there's a sort of
whole language that we use to kind of
speak in code about the kind of
candidates that we're looking for and
what I sort of learned over time is that
the nominee ultimately is almost always
a person who the person who best
synergizes these two financial dynamics
that are existing in the plane he or she
must be what's the word that's kind
morally flexible enough on the one hand
to be the kind of person who is able to
raise a hundred million dollars from
corporate donors and only a certain kind
of person is going to get that money and
on the other hand it has to be a
candidate who satisfies the press's sort
of unconscious need and desire for a
entertaining product that they can sell
and we ultimately came up with this sort
of private almost like a fraternity code
language to describe what it is that
we're looking for the that that hidden
quality of the person who synergizes
those two dynamics we we came up with a
word to describe we called it
electability all right and if you look
back it at campaign coverage dating back
decades
you'll see that there's a sort of
endless quest to decide who's electable
and who isn't and they will you'll find
all these really strange descriptions of
people who who aren't elected
and the reasons will be really really
strange like you know dennis kucinich
was routinely described as someone who
is too short and too funny-looking to be
president the Howard Dean was
unelectable because he was pointed that
was a word they used to about him a lot
he was unorthodox they said and this was
back in the old days before his sort of
transformation into a sort of mainstream
Democrat but he he back when he was
getting all of his money from small
internet donations at the outset of his
campaign and when he was against the war
they invented this whole code language
to describe all the different ways that
that people like Dean were inadequate
and not not electable all right and so
the the whole purpose of campaign
coverage became this quest essentially
by a priesthood like a Oh more like high
school Heather's right to figure out who
the appropriate popular kid was going to
be for for the for the nomination and
and we as the news media we we sort of
douve into this idea that we that it was
we were in this king-making role that it
was our job to decide who was the right
person who was the wrong person and
without really being aware of it we we
started to think of ourselves as the
people who made that decision for voters
the Trump was different in a couple of
ways he didn't owe donors in the same
way that that politicians traditionally
did now of course he when he came into
office one of the first things he did is
he he put every big business wine that
he could possibly find into into high
office and he despite the fact that he
said that he he knew that got people
from Goldman Sachs and couldn't stand
them and Ted Cruz was in their pocket
and he wasn't he of course puts five
Goldman Sachs people in the cabinet
within ten minutes of becoming president
but he as a candidate he didn't know the
donors and that made him different um
but on the other score he massively
satisfied the press's desire for a let
for an entertaining product
and the despite the fact that he was
unorthodox in this other way in the in
the funding way the press responded to
him almost immediately as somebody who
was an answer to a lot of their of their
financial problems and this is this is
an issue that has continued to this day
and I get through this later and before
I think reporters even knew what had
happened in the early stages of the
campaign when politicians traditionally
need to buy their own publicity trumpet
probably already received a billion
dollars in free coverage before before
New Hampshire even so at this incredibly
crucial period of the campaign when
typically people are weeded out for a
couple of reasons but usually because
they're not able to raise enough money
Trump survived and went forward almost
entirely because he he satisfied the
financial demands of our business um the
flip side to this is that although the
press gets into its role of deciding who
is electable and and who is in and
usually that expresses itself in the
press approving of a certain candidate
person who is boring enough in the right
ways to be you know electable you know
they they will decide that a certain
kind of candidate isn't isn't right for
the camera doesn't look like a president
isn't isn't quote/unquote presidential
when when a candidate steps over the
line and the people and the reporters in
the plane decide that this person can no
longer be president because they've done
something wrong they we typically go
through this maneuver that another
reporter described to me is the seal of
death and if you go back and think about
it there are countless instances of this
where a candidate will do something
stupid get caught in a scandal or just
do something dumb on camera and the
press will sort of pig pile on the
candidate with an avalanche of negative
coverage for a couple of days on end and
usually that wipes out the candidate
an early example might be ed muskie
crying in New Hampshire for anybody who
can remember that Gary Hart does I'm
gonna remember the muck the monkey
business photo in the 80s and then
Howard Dean scream I think was there was
sort of the great modern example of this
I looked it up actually in the first two
days after after Dean scream the the
tape was played by local television
stations in America something like 660
times in the first 48 hours and so it
was sort of viral media before viral
media and Trump was basically seal of
death out of the race and in some
reporters and I am the red I write about
this in the book we talk about the
stages of how that usually goes this
script is so well-known to reporters
that we we we actually know how this
goes in advance the we do to seal death
then there's a an abashed public apology
always the the candidate will will
apologize or try to go explain his or
her behavior and then there's a what we
call a dead man walking period where as
the as the candidate plunges in the
polls and so it tries to soldier on
bravely for two or three weeks usually
getting increasingly angry as the as the
press follows them less and less and
then finally like three or four weeks
later there's a you know the the sort of
humiliating exit though the
anticlimactic withdrawal we call it
where you'll see a page sixteen notice
you know so-and-so withdraws from race
after you know getting three percent in
New Hampshire or something like that
that's that's the script of how this
usually works and Trump was the first
person to defy this script and this
happened over and over and over again
early in the campaign really starting
the first day of his campaign when he
you know he had that whole line about
you know they're bringing Mexican bring
a rapist over the border they're
bringing the worst people the press
wasn't it I would say that they weren't
completely in seal of death mode at that
moon but they certainly were
um a few weeks later when he had his
remarks about John McCain sure we'll
remember you know I I prefer people who
aren't captured it was the universal
assessment of people in the news media
that this was not a survivable comment
that you can say bad things about
Mexicans but you can't say bad things
about veterans in this country and
expect to be the president and in fact
there were actually stories to that
effect if you go back and look you'll
find editorials like you know he's
whether we whether we agree with her or
not we think this is a bridge too far
and and he's not going to he's not going
to survive this but what Trump did defy
it and he did it in a way that for
reporters was was shocking not only did
he did he survive it but when questioned
about his remarks he just flat-out
denied that he ever made them he said I
I didn't say it and reporters didn't
know how to respond to that
how could he say that it he didn't say
it it's on video we're going to show it
right you know what right after he says
it on and and then there was another
phenomenon that was very strange for a
lot of us in the media which was after
that strange performance which we
thought was bewildering where he denied
saying something that he clearly said he
not only didn't go down in the polls he
went up in the polls and this was a very
this should have been a signal to a lot
of us in the media that he had an
insight into the process that we didn't
which was that nowadays in the modern
media landscape your audiences are less
and less attuned and they care less and
less about whether or not you're right
or factually accurate as long as you're
telling them something that they want to
hear and Trump Trump understood this at
a level that the news media didn't and
he repeatedly defied this idea that we
could tell him that he couldn't be
president anymore because he had told a
lie we were unaware of the fact that
audiences just weren't really all that
interested and what we had to say about
that now
there's a couple of other things that
were really interested are really
interesting about campaigning that
Donald Trump saw through and I think a
lot of us didn't see through a long time
ago I was when I again when I was
watching is that her campaigning happen
at this snail's pace for years and years
and years um I noticed that the campaign
marketing process is a very strange
thing it's it's extremely sophisticated
in some ways and extremely simple-minded
in other ways if you listen to the
speeches in the in the pre Trump era
they were basically just strings of
meaningless cliches piled on top of one
another and it didn't almost didn't
matter which candidate was speaking if
you took out certain words from each
speech you wouldn't be able to tell
which party the person represented or
what of what policies he or she
supported they just they were just sort
of anodyne meaningless phrases strung
together one after the other and just to
give you a couple of examples of actual
campaign rhetoric that was very common
here's one for millions and millions of
American the-dream millions and millions
of Americans the dream with which I grew
up has been shattered the choice is
between the right change in the wrong
change between going forward and going
backward this is totally meaningless of
course but within these meaningless
phrases there was actually you know as
we found as I found out an incredibly
sophisticated marketing phenomenon and
what we now know and in fact they
actually introduced this to to consumers
that they were they were using
incredibly sophisticated technology to
find out which words people liked more
than other words I'm sure everybody
who's watched debates now and they
you'll sometimes see there's a crawl on
the bottom with a little graph and when
a candidate is talking you'll see it go
up or down and this is what they call
dial survey technology and basically
what they'll do is they'll get a group a
control group into a room and they'll
have a bunch of people sit there and
you'll have a candidate read off a
speech and if the people like the word
they're supposed to turn the dial
this way and if they don't like the word
they turn they turn it that way and what
people the people who are running these
campaigns found out is that certain
kinds of voters just like it they like
hearing certain kinds of words and what
they would do is they would write these
speeches which were essentially
collections of words that had
meaningless sentences connecting them
together and so for progressive voters
if you listen to speeches that are
directed towards that kind of voter
you'll find that they are very often
contain words like futuresmart and
compassion but for a right-wing voter
you'll often see words like family tough
work obligation and so what these
candidates were doing they were using
this very very advanced technology to
basically lay this incredibly idiotic
kind of politics on millions and
millions of people and the way I like to
think of it is they were building like
the most advanced rocket in history to
deliver the world's worst cheeseburger
to the moon basically it's just it was
very very sophisticated marketing very
very dumb politics and so why is one
part of the process done in one part of
its smart well the politics part when
you think about it doesn't need to be
smart really most people only have one
of three choices when it comes to
politics they can either vote Democratic
they can vote Republican or they can not
vote at all of course interestingly not
voting at all it continues to be the
overwhelmingly most popular choice among
the three but the level of marketing
sophistication that you need to get
people to make one of three choices is
relatively simpler than it is to get
people to watch a political show at all
compared to everything else that's on
television right so in other words it's
easier to get somebody to vote
Democratic or republican than it is to
get a person to watch a political speech
instead of Monday Night Football or
Keeping Up with the Kardashians or or
porn or whatever it is they're you they
watch
so as time went on the sort of reality
show aspects of campaigning this all the
trappings of campaigns the the lighting
the the production values the the back
the backdrops the scenery all of that
became more and more sophisticated over
time while the actual politics became
more and more simplistic over time so
what you ended up getting was an
incredibly sophisticated television show
about very very unsophisticated politics
and Donald Trump's insight and a lot of
this had to do with the fact that he was
a reality television star was that not
only had our politics devolved into a TV
show but it was basically a bad TV show
any TV show that planned to have its
leading characters be people like Jeb
Bush Scott Walker and Lindsey Graham you
know probably needed new producers and
Donald Trump turned he took what was you
know a television show that was constant
had drama every single day something
happens in the campaign every day so
it's great for reality TV format from
that's perspective there's always some
kind of thing going on there was a
back-and-forth between the candidates
but the content tended to be relatively
a non sensational compared to Survivor
or you know Tila Tequila show or a you
know whatever flava flav Flavor of Love
Donald Trump wasn't competing with other
Republican candidates he was repeating
competing with Flavor Flav and Tila
Tequila and he turned the
the presidential campaign add to this
this crazy can't-miss wild reality
television show and for the news media
that makes its money by getting people
to watch their program this was like
manna and heaven for them um so so
that's one thing that he understood that
other candidates didn't he also
understood how to how to make the
process more intimate and how to bring
people into the process one of the
things that have happened over the years
is that people actual people became
irrelevant to this television show that
we were making the way the campaign is
structured as you fly around with with
the with the press corps you don't have
enough time when you're in each city to
actually talk to people and the
campaign's increasingly didn't talk to
them either they just needed people as
sort of stylized backdrops they were
there to be props basically in a
television show they were there to you
know if he needed somebody to to show
that he was sort of down with
construction workers or with the working
person they would have a bunch of people
in hard hats up on stage or the you know
they wanted to appeal the farmers they
would visit a farming town and you know
be photographed you know hugging a
farmer but they didn't actually talk to
these people and the people in the press
started to fall into the trap also of
just using people for quotes we would
descend on mass into these towns we
would not really spend a whole lot of
time with them and then we would just
hustle them for quotes do you like this
/ Canada do you like that candidate
oftentimes we were looking for the
people in the crowd to say a certain
thing and we would search people out and
until they actually said the quote that
they were looking for - another very bad
practice that journalists do and people
of course they resented it and what
ended up happening was is that both
politicians and the media started to
lose touch with actual people and they
increasingly relied upon each other
especially upon pollsters to sort of
take the temperature of the people out
there and if you've ever traveled in in
a campaign it's actually like it's
literally a prison once the Secret
Service gets involved you can't leave
the group after the general election
campaign starts because security is so
tight I would bet back in my first
campaigns I was a pretty heavy smoker
back that I'm not anymore but you
actually had to get what they called
Sherpas to leave there were like people
who carried bags for the campaign's they
would leave the group to go to stores
and get cigarettes and other supplies
for people because you're so cut off
from the actual voters that you can't
leave the group and so you lose touch
with what's going on you and what
happened is over over in decades not
only do you do you lose touch with what
people are thinking but you lose touch
with the ability to talk to people and
to understand the cues that they're
saying and to learn for instance people
would would start to rely on polls to
tell them whether or not
voters liked or disliked this or that
candidate what polls can't tell you the
difference between say you know rage and
mere disapproval they're they're able to
tell you that people are drifting them
one way or the other but until you get
that qualitative experience of sitting
down with people and really
understanding what their frustrations
are you're just going to miss what's
actually going on um and so Trump he
took advantage of all this he took
advantage of the fact that we were out
of touch and he used that again to help
solve his own problems what he started
to do was he started to incorporate the
press into his act I remember being in
at Plymouth State University in New
Hampshire and Trump you as it usually
happens is there's like a Arizer in the
middle of the hall and there's a bunch
of reporters and camera people and we're
stuck behind ropes like zoo animals in
the middle of the crowd and Trump he
started to experiment with mentioning us
in the middle of his speeches and he
would say things like look at these
people look at these
suckers they hate me they never thought
I would make it this far they've never
traveled so far for an event look at
them they hate you you know and what
would happen over time was his rhetoric
became more and more aggressive and
crowds would start to physically turn
towards the the media during his
presentations and it would hiss and Boo
and sometimes even throw stuff and you
know occasionally like you little
scuffles broke out and it got a little
bit dangerous in there and you know on
one level it was horrible and terrifying
because it evokes images of a lot of
sort of fascistic techniques from other
sort of strongman type politicians but
on the other hand he was also using a
sort of a WWE style method of turning
what had been a sort of supernaturally
boring phenomenon which is the
presidential stump speech to just you
know if anybody has ever been to one if
you can survive one that's amazing but
you know for the press corps to be able
to listen to the same speech 50 or 60
times like we do I used to have a
numbered cliche system I heard one
candidate's cliches so often that I knew
the top 20 by heart and instead of
writing down notes from his speeches I
would just have collections of numbers
it would be like 3 8 15 11 you know and
so Trump took this this terrible boring
format and he turned it into this
intimate menacing real physical
experience where the representative of
the hated establishment was literally in
the room and that was us and again a lot
of this this was this was years of the
press gradually losing its ability to
talk to ordinary people had turned
around and allowed this fatuous New York
billionaire to sell himself as closer to
the common man
and then reporters and and when I talked
to people who were at Trump crowds I
would ask them you know why do you what
do you feel this way or that way why do
you like this guy and they would say
well he's real he's not reading from a
script' which was true you know unlike
the other you know the numbered cliches
Trump literally couldn't keep it would
pass out his speeches but the text of
what was supposed to be his speech and
he would deviate from it in the second
word because he is the attention span
and so it's so short that he couldn't he
couldn't read actual prepared remarks
people would say things to me like he's
real and you people aren't you know I
remember one guy in Washington Wisconsin
saying to me you know I'm going to clean
up his his speech here a little bit but
he says basically you jerks were always
trying to tell us how to live our lives
but you can't change a goddamn oil
filter and you know he was right you're
sort of right you know the the people
who represent the press corps tend to be
the suit of a feat again rich for the
most part because we're you know the
people who are there they have to be in
order to in order to afford the trip
they have to come from a certain class
they're almost all from New York
Washington and LA they went to the best
schools and they have a certain attitude
towards life and and Trump used that and
he used that to sort of bridge the gap
between himself and ordinary people and
so the last thing I want to talk about
is is sort of the appropriation of
bogeymen Trump did something that was
really strange but interesting the
traditional method of winning elections
in this country is you get up in front
of a group of people you say to them you
know I know you've had it hard in the
last four or five years and I'm going to
tell you who to blame and then X Y Z and
then a B and C they're all there they're
to blame for your troubles and you know
don't don't we hate them and that was
that's sort of the traditional format of
a campaign speech the only difference is
that they're a different bogeyman on the
Republican side and on the Democratic
side on the Republican side
the the villains tend to be immigrants
you know welfare moms liberal professors
terrorists they actually have a very
long list of villains on the other side
you know on the Democratic side it's
it's a little bit smarter and a little
bit more sophisticated it's it's
corporations it's it's health insurance
companies etc etc and what's interesting
is that the traditional candidate never
crossed lines that you you know if you
were either used one group of villains
or another group of villains Trump just
gobbled up all of them he's just he's so
omnivorous in in his sort of the way he
approaches life in every way that he
used both lists you know he would go to
every crowd and he was all things to all
people at all times I'm against the
corporations I'm against Goldman Sachs
I'm against immigrants and against this
and that and the other and whatever you
hated Trump would eventually get around
to it in his speech and again the reason
that people didn't do this in the past
traditionally is because the media would
say well look this is a contradiction
you can't be this and that because those
two things don't really go together but
Trump was tuned into the fact that the
people had tuned us out they had stopped
listening to us and that you know all of
us sort of News reporters who love to
correct people spelling on Twitter and
you know or just didn't know how to fix
cars that what we thought about what we
know his his politics didn't really
matter anymore
and his ability to sort of continue to
continually survive the negative
editorializing of the press and our
attempts to sort of bounce him out of
the race through this or seal of death
episodes which increased in frequency as
the campaign went along and as as
reporters became more and more aware of
their role their financial role in
helping Trump win but we we became more
cognizant of it you heard of things like
les Moonves with CBS everybody here this
you know these famously said Trump is
bad for America but good for business
you know as as that kind of spread in
press we became more and more aggressive
in our in our editorial stance towards
Trump and that just worked to his
advantage the the meaner we got Trump
has this uncanny ability to turn
everybody in his orbit into another
pro-wrestling character and when he gets
up there and he says that where we were
the opposition after a while it actually
turned out to be a little bit true we
you know he he cartoon eyes his own
opposition he eventually gets everybody
to sort of lower themselves you think
about you know Rubio making sort of dong
jokes during the middle of the debates
or you know people throwing water at
each other and Ted Ted Cruz started
acting like a ham during debate doing
impersonations from The Princess Bride
and and Ron Paul was chained selling
things in half and shooting the tax code
and everybody starts acting like a
reality star when they're around Trump
long enough and and we were like that
too in the news media and what ends up
happening was that the symbiotic
relationship started occurring where we
paid more and more attention to them
even even though even though the things
we were saying about them were negative
we never took the cameras off of him
fret for a second and we still haven't
and what is the end result of that
here's some striking statistics sense
the since the election in November cable
news ratings are up 50% at CNN they're
up 50% at Fox they're up over 35% at
MSNBC and some programs are up higher
than that on that channel CNN expects to
make over a billion dollars this year in
profits and again what what starts to
happen after a while is that
unconsciously this the fact that he's
making everybody so much money and make
no mistake about it it's the fact that
that politics has begun to eat into the
entertainment world
and the the profitability of
entertainment and we're taking some of
Hollywood's market share by creating
politics as this giant reality show
unconsciously the people who are
covering Donald Trump whether they know
it or not they legitimize it the whole
thing and that's why you'll see periodic
episodes like you know he gives that
speech after the joint speech to
Congress and and there's a you know CNN
will say you know he became president in
the United States tonight or that
happens after he lobs missiles you know
Tomahawk missiles that Syria you know
Fareed Zakaria will get up and say
exactly the same thing you know Donald
Trump became President of the United
States tonight and this is a company
that's making a billion dollars this
year because of Donald Trump and so it's
just a symbiotic relationship this had
been going on for a long time
it with this sort of synthesis of all
these different things the the the
collapse and Trust in news media the
declining profitability of news media
which was suddenly turned around by this
candidate who suddenly made money for
everybody nobody could make money for
for a longest time and then suddenly
everybody's making money you have to
think about this when you think about
how politics is covered in this country
and it's not just Trump that's that's
you know so my final word of caution
would be that the network's have learned
and a lot of us in the business started
to talk about this last year that that
you know what Trump does his total
indifference to whether a thing is true
or not and the fact that he knows that
his his core supporters don't really
care all that much the network's have
also learned that lesson two in the last
year or so they knows we sort of by
custom and because of the libel laws
which don't you know are incredibly weak
in this country and and really don't
apply all that much the public figures
you know by custom we we we we try very
very hard to get things right and to not
be careless about citing sources that
aren't reliable
that sort of thing but in the age of
Trump that's really it's starting to go
out the window everywhere and you know
it just as a sort of general warning I
would say again this whole phenomenon of
Trump and how he sort of unlocked he's
converted politics into a show that has
implications that go beyond Donald Trump
as well I think everybody should just be
aware that this is a phenomenon that has
negatively impacted the entire business
and everything that was bad about
for-profit media in the past has gotten
exponentially worse in the last year and
you can expect you know going forward
that we'll see we'll see less and less
coverage of you know actual things that
matter you know environmental issues you
know if corruption and contracting in
the military disasters like flint you
know those things will get less and less
airtime and what will we get instead is
a very heavily polarized media landscape
where there's one set of viewers that
hates this politician and one set of
viewers that hates another politician
and they're all going to they're all
going to tune in and watch and the
standards are going to go out the window
so it's just in some I would just say
just be careful you know not without
commenting on any particular story that
the arc of the sort of failure of our
business has has really steepen in the
last year or so and I think as news
consumers people should pay more and
more attention to independent media and
alternative media and worry more and
more about the commercial media going
forward and thank you very much and I
would love to talk
[Music]
[Applause]
so if you have questions please come
this way and we'll do a line back that
way thank you I mean amazing talk I was
wondering if you could talk about some
of the unseen kind of new levels of
thought control such as Cambridge
analytical and how Trump used data
mining how that's even a bigger climate
that were it right now and how that's
affecting us jump using data might mean
all the candidates use data mining I
mean I I think that's you know without
knowing exactly that exact thing but I
know that that was a phenomenon that
dated back to the Kerry the first Kerry
Bush campaign that was when that first
really started and I think it's
worrisome I think the whole idea of
targeting shaping a candidate's policies
based on the on your on the research
that you do into people searching habits
I think that's going to be something
that's more and more true going forward
they're going to be able to target
political advertising the people based
on what they search for and on the web
and all that's incredibly disturbing I
you know in the same way that they're
they're selling that data to to
prospective employers so they get
they're going to be able to tell what
you what websites you look at the idea
of politicians being able to look at is
just horrifying
and I think yeah that's definitely
something to worry about
so I was just going to see if you agree
at this opinion and I think it presents
a problem and I'm wondering if you know
of a possible solution to it
but I like that you compared it to him
not competing with the other politicians
but the reality stars because when he
got primary to actually said that the
only way that Clinton could win is if
she changed her name to Hillary booboo
right and but the problem is I feel like
because it is so entertainment
centric that's almost kind of like a lot
people like to compare like the Empire
of America
Rome but then it's kind of glad it's
gladiator kind of asked where I feel
like it's it's good that you we do have
these critiques and that you are
addressing this and I love it is
actually directed at the press even
though it says president on your book
but I think a lot people hook get on
Trump and try to analyze him as a person
instead of looking at the system that
created them because I feel like for him
it's self-fulfilling he doesn't have a
clue like he's not right and essentially
doing this but as long as we're giving
attention to it it's like a growing
beast and and where's where's it going
to end like how do you stop that how do
you it's a great question there's a
couple things that are really
interesting you know that I'd love to
talk about here first though is that one
of the things that one of the huge
weaknesses of the political press in
this country is that we we always think
when we see a political phenomenon we
always imagine that it originates with
the politician right like just to give
you a classic example the Bernie Sanders
phenomenon wasn't was all about Bernie
Sanders to Washington reporters right it
wasn't it wasn't 13 million people
expressing themselves and being upset
about you know the their feelings about
the Democratic Party it wasn't this
organic thing that rose up from the
population it was because some you know
independent socialist backbencher jumped
the line and got you know and so they
that's the way they like they always
look at the Washington character first
and they don't look outward at the at
the actual people and then the larger
thing that's going on
Trump is is horrible for for that
instinct because he he concentrates so
much attention on him and his person and
he deflects so much attention not only
from the system but from the larger
forces that are going on in the
population that everybody imagines that
Donald Trump is the only problem and not
that there have been you know growing
trend towards nativism and racism in
this in the population cetera et cetera
et cetera so the what the solution is I
think we just have to focus out more as
in the media we got to focus on systemic
problems more we got to talk to people
more and and make it less about the the
fairy tale soap opera which is the easy
way to do the story you know that and
that's that's why we do it because
that's easy you know and so yeah I think
the what the solution is we just got to
do our jobs better and I don't know how
that's going to happen so if we assume
that the Trump's the nominee in 2020
which he most likely will be barring
something serious like impeachment or
something like that if he is the nominee
and based on your experience what you've
seen
if this dynamic is still present where
he's he's he he is who he is he's
gladiatorial what will be the formula
for the Democrats the counter that
should they have someone who's also like
him or should they have someone who's
who's somehow a foil to him I mean based
on what you've seen what's the answer
for the left in 2020
it's a great question um see how what I
worry about is that is the I already
hear people in Washington talking about
this and saying that we have to get our
own version of Trump all right and we
have to get a media figure we got to get
you know whether it's Dwayne the rock
Johnson or Mark Zuckerberg or whoever it
is right like we we need to go that
route and what's interesting to me is
that they've already forgotten the
lessons I think of Barack Obama Barack
Obama is a diametrically opposite
character to Donald Trump he is someone
who prefers you know he's reserved
polite he doesn't act like a real
reality star he comports him even though
you know for me personally politically I
don't agree with Obama life he's been a
disappointment to me a lot of ways
style-wise he won by appealing I think
to people's better imagination right and
what I see in Washington is a lot of
pessimism they don't believe that that
you know finding a better way to
communicate with people that get it you
know telling people that they understand
what their problems are making a sincere
effort to find out why people are
disaffected I think that's the easiest
route to winning you know is going out
and actually finding out what's wrong
and coming up with solutions that people
can connect with you know and but you
won't they won't do that you know I
think they what they're going to do is
they're going to look at a lot of polls
and they're going to they're going to
look at the media media centric version
of how to win elections and they're
going to try to do their own version I
think
hi so I started thinking about this a
couple days ago in terms of you know the
backlash if Trump continues to try and
dig his own grave and put his foot in
his mouth and all that other stuff
eventually things will start to roll
against him but there's going to be a
backlash from that in terms of all the
people who support him and it'll be like
you know why are you taking away my toy
and you know the that could be the media
that could be the Democratic Party that
could be the Republican Party and so you
might have a phenomenon where
everybody's trying to be like no you and
Peacham I don't want to impeach um you
impeach him you know so that they don't
deal with that backlash and I'm
wondering if you see any signs of that
and how that would play out yeah I think
actually I would say that there's not a
lot of hesitation about taking on Donald
Trump in Washington now anything I would
say that there's sort of an opposite
problem which is that being against
Trump has become whatever the only thing
that a lot of politicians are about now
and I I think that the key to succeeding
going forward is they have to have some
other kind of messages in addition to
that politically going after Donald
Trump doesn't seem to be anybody's
problem and they're the the knives are
out in full force right now for for
Trump and they're gunning for
impeachment there's no question about
that except for people like Mitch
McConnell well he's a Republican first
well he is but but but in terms of like
I was kind of surprised about uh not
completely but you know cuz he's trying
to control this thing
you know whoa look impeachment is a it's
a very extreme step and and think think
about approving it for a member of your
own party and think about think about
doing it in this situation you know um
there's a lot of political will to try
to end Donald Trump's presidency right
now and it's far harder than it's been
for anybody since since Bill Clinton so
I wouldn't say that that's a problem I
think there going to be plenty of
candidates we're going to want to play
that role of the person who took on
Donald Trump I mean they're practically
stepping over each other to do it Warner
Schiff all these people that these
committee chairs are anxious to be that
person in front of the cameras oh
there's political opportunity there the
the problem the problem that I see you
know I just I just worry that the palace
intrigue aspect of it is has occupied so
much of the Democrats time that they're
they're not paying attention to other
things Thanks hi thanks for great talk
the thing that I noticed about the two
sides of the bus the politicians in the
front and the reporters in back is that
there is a kind of underlying logic
which is a profit incentive in both
cases and to me that bespeaks the fact
that capitalism is something that feeds
off the systemic pathologies of
societies and right now it seems like
it's gotten the point where it's just
reached a level of death Drive and like
there something about the Trump
phenomenon that feels like it could
really just unleash some really
pathological forces in our society to
the point where the situation you're
describing with the media is just one
component of a kind of embrace of sheer
irrationality and I feel or my question
for you is that whether you think some
kind of like deep and systemic
paradigmatic changes is called for as
part of what were yeah no I totally
agree I I I think one of the things that
I believe that one of the reasons that
Trump happened is because people are on
some level they're screaming out for
something drastically different you know
and it's it's for a lot of people it's
an inarticulate longing you know for a
new way to experience life and and I
think the sort of this is relentless
heartlessness of modern American you
know industrial capitalism and it's it's
a sort of really casual immorality and
and I think it's tough for people you
know even if they don't understand it
you know it and we need I think we need
something we need to at least have
somebody who's capable of opening a
discussion of can we live another way in
this country you know and that question
has been suppressed at the at the
presidential level you know it's not
really it hasn't really been possible to
have that dialogue because words like
you know socialism is of course a taboo
bernie has made it less so but even you
know other ideas you know like you know
there's a European you know guaranteed
income movement you know like these
really interesting thoughts they're not
did we can entertain them because our
politics are so narrow and yeah I agree
with you and and and just to talk about
one thing about the media in terms of
capitalism for ages we insulated
ourselves from the profit motive problem
in media by having this sort of unspoken
understanding you know the FCC they
licensed out the airwaves to the PUC to
these private companies and there was a
there was an understanding that that
they would get to make all this money by
having these TV stations and radio
stations but in return they would have
to do something in the public interest
in terms of news so traditionally news
was a lost leader for four television
stations radio stations and they made
their money covering sports and
entertainment other stuff and they
didn't worry about making money off the
news well that changed started changing
in the 80s and now you know this is what
you get when one news is all about
profits it just becomes insane you know
unfactual unobjective and you know it's
I think it's really disturbing Thanks
[Applause]
hi Matt I'm today on Netflix the
Rogerses movie debuted and up until
Trump who are just was more or less a
husband how influential was he in the
2016 election sorry who the one
Rajasthan Rajasthan how influential is
he um my understanding of Roger stone is
that he's a big talker who uh who has
less access to powerful people than he
has always claimed so I don't know you
know Roger stone he was an advisor to
the Trump campaign he's um
really not in position to really answer
that question very well you know
obviously he figures a lot in this this
Russia drama depending on who you talk
to but that's just you know I I couldn't
speak to it because I never haven't
uncovered that story okay I have a part
to it this question if the media did not
cover Trump like they did because they
would concern with the ratings do you
think he would have gotten as far as you
did so that's a great question but I
think it goes hand in hand with a couple
of things so if if we as had as a habit
did not have a for-profit media we would
have a different kind of audience
leading into 2016 we would have a more
thinking audience we would have a more
discerning audience you know Trump isn't
something that happens overnight it
happens after decades of watching the
dumbest possible television and lowering
your attention span to half a second
and I think you know the fact that
nobody reads anymore and I mean the
ability to think critically about what
people are looking at is a phenomenon
that's been that's been degraded for
decades and if we if we had a different
kind of media dating back decades
there's no way Donald Trump would win
because he was so plainly unsuited for
the job but he was perfectly suited for
what this actually was which is a
television show I mean and and and so if
we didn't have that format he would
never have been successful thank you hi
hi so um what the person said earlier
about uh the Democrats opening their own
Trump I was thinking that too like he
maybe he's gonna open his own franchises
like his University or something so
we'll teach you
political hacking but um you were saying
stuff about being in the bullpen and
that he got the crowd to turn on you and
like all this up for the press in
general but despite all that I've
noticed you're really objective about
this guy still like you're able to look
at it from many sites like you don't I
get the sense you don't like Trump but
you know you can you can like kinda you
can kind of see through like his tactics
and like oh he's like he's like flipped
it around he's like he figured out a
deal for these politics so if Paul if
politicians are actors is a Donald Trump
the greatest actor and can you respect
his hustle as an actor well that's a
tough question I mean I find Trump
fascinating on a lot of levels and um
and and there's a huge question
philosophical question with Trump which
is is it did you do this on purpose did
he did he intend to have all these
tactics work this way
or was it just a total accident of his
insane narcissistic personality that
just happened to fit like a glove into
the equally insane format of our
presidential system when and that's the
form that's the thing I leaned toward
but
you know I remember another New
Hampshire incident you probably all
remember it in Manchester when Trump
said there was a woman who stood up in
the crowd and said can I swear here she
sees he says Ted Cruz is a right
and and Trump looked at the woman and he
said oh that's terrible what she said
that's terrible and you shouldn't you
shouldn't have said that say it again
all right so so she says it again and
you know all of us in the media we're
watching him and you could see him
thinking he's he's thinking if she says
it's a six-hour story if I say it it's a
four days story you know what I mean and
he he paused and he thought and then he
goes she just said Ted Cruz ooh
right and now there's video right and it
Rockets around the internet and
obliterates everything else you know the
involved with the New Hampshire election
so Trump I think on some level he just
he can't help himself like you know he
watches his tweeting habits and
everything there's no way that this guy
is sitting there and calculating it's a
good idea to tweet about Meryl Streep
and stuff like you know like no way but
he part of it you know he does have some
instincts that some of it is conscious
so I think it's a mix of things like you
know you know as a reporter you have to
resist the easy interpretation that X Y
or Z I think it can be all things you
know I think he's crazy and an actor and
you know and a manipulator and all that
stuff so the bypassing disgusts you
or as fascinates you well it's
disgusting clearly I mean no the the
it's everything you wouldn't want in a
politician but the you know on some
level if you read the book clearly early
in the campaign when I I thought I saw
Trump I thought his historical role was
going to be that he was going to destroy
the Republican Party because it seemed
pretty clear early and early on that he
was he was sort of steam rolling through
the whole process almost like a like a
classic farcical parody of everything
right and he made everybody who was on
stage with him
look more ridiculous than he was and on
some of them on a literary level it was
kind of perfect right it was a perfect
story and the fact that it was people
like Rubio and Jeb Bush and all those
people who were the victims of it kind
of didn't make you feel so bad about it
I mean to me it made it a much funnier
story and then and then after the
nomination it took this incredibly dark
turn where it's like this is actually
going to happen and he's going to get
elected and when that started to happen
you know that it stopped being funny and
then it started to be like insane and
crazy and terrifying and and you know I
think that's where we are right now so I
had I had different feelings about it
the whole way through I thought I would
imagine everybody did great did you uh
I thought the longer he was in the race
more likely he was going to win and that
was even when he was with Hillary right
so it's like okay it's like one week so
he's probably gonna win right at this
point right right excellent
excellent well you it was a good good
job thanks Matt I really thought I was
excellent I might take a different kind
of direction on this uh when I hear you
discussing this issue first of all the
idea of focusing not on the incident but
the context but I guess the context of
your profession in particular like the
fact that you're a magazine writer and
at a news writer enables you to engage
more of your critical thinking
facilities than other people might be
able to I think we all have recognized
that we make poor decisions when we're
rushed but given that like I mean like
right now I'm a professor and I have
many students who want their papers
immediately more they'd rather their
papers be done quickly than accurately
right given that we're all rushed for
time what is the hope for your
profession is there hope because it
seemed like there's a positive feedback
loop that you point to being a problem
is there a point where that just the
human body cannot take any longer or do
we you know stand in the ruins of
democracy before then
Wow that's a great question and a scary
one no I I'm really worried about it
because um you know it's this is this
has been a problem going back in our
business for decades and it started off
really I would say in the mid 80s and
early 90s and what started off with
seemingly small problems like the
appearance of free alternative
newspapers right and we started to give
give gift papers away then the internet
came along and people got their ads from
you know they didn't have to go to buy
the Village Voice anymore to find to get
an apartment or put up a want ad they
could just go on the internet so that
depleted massively depleted the income
streams of alternative media and what
was the first thing that newspapers cut
when they stopped making a lot of money
they stopped they cut the people who
only spent who worked five or six weeks
on one story right the first thing they
cut was investigative reporting the
second thing they cut was fact-checking
right and so you know in the old days
you would have things like the
Cincinnati Enquirer doing a ten-part
series on the Chiquita banana company
right and they would send these two
reporters down to South America and they
would they would you know they would be
very well funded to do these long
investigations and and people were were
psyched for that kind of stuff they had
an app but the public had an appetite
for that kind of reporting well now you
two things would happen number one the
audience's don't have the attention span
to devour four and five thousand more
piece articles about things they're
consuming tweets right and the other
thing is that the companies have found
out that they don't need to do that to
make money you know so they they're
they've invested all their money in
graphics and presentation and and the
content gets smaller and smaller and and
less weighty all the time and so there's
no investigations there's no critical
thinking there's no reflection
it's just reactive and it's become like
this animalistic thing almost right and
I really worry about that because not
not only are you not getting good
reporting but you're also training your
audience right to be rushed like that
right and and and you sure you see it
kids come up now they just they just
don't have the the stomach to read
through long things anymore and I think
it's a serious problem and I don't know
how to fix it do you have an idea I mean
I you know I I mean I guess in general
it just seems like like speed is kind of
the enemy of democracy although we seem
to love speed so much I don't know
myself except I just refuse to acquiesce
sometimes and right right throw sand in
the gears I think is a common popular
way to scribe it yeah no I mean I I wish
there was some way to do it but yeah I
think it's you're absolutely right speed
is a huge problem with us in Trump with
Trump again Trump was perfect for this
because you had to check Twitter every
ten seconds to see what he was up to he
was that he's the perfect futuristic
speed candidate right like you know you
could be high on something at 4:00 in
the morning and he'd be changing doing
something you know he's yeah it's it's
it's very bad thank you good evening
Matt thanks for the talk tonight a
couple of observations maybe from you
can we agree that probably we don't this
des gentleman before me the only one who
use the word all night but a democracy
and can we agree that we it's a myth
probably in the United States it
probably more closer we live in a
corporate fascist state the way you win
elections also it seems to me is whether
it's Republican or Democrat you want the
fewest people to turn out right and in
the end result was that maybe there was
52 or 54 percent of people that voted
for president which means that the man
at one got probably 25% of the total
vote yeah no it's it's ridiculous
yeah I know I agree with the quite
otally agree the wait the way we elect
presidents in this country has nothing
to do with democracy it has nothing to
do with it's you know it's a very
strange process then and
in the degree to which people are not
concerned with the lack of turnout you
know and and aren't horrified that that
that neither you know beats both of the
candidates you know by factor of two to
one other than Russia for a long time
and they used to use to be able to vote
for none of the above in elections and
in a couple of races that it actually
won and and you know that it's this is
really the crazy thing is the Trump what
what Trump did last year was almost more
democratic than the other system which
is just we're going to give two sort of
preordained sort of corporate-funded
parties the ability to choose between
you know to spend a billion dollars
apiece on on a couple of marketing
campaigns and people will get to choose
between one of those two things you know
that's not terribly democratic either
and and yeah I worry about it sure hi my
question is that you said that Trump
brought out the polarization that's been
happening do we have time to unify or is
it too far for that and Trump being
someone that I don't I didn't vote for
but if he were baby impeached behind him
is pence and then behind him is Ryan so
and I'm hard pressed to find a
politician that I can really believe in
regardless right right I mean it's a
great question the one thing I would
worry about with the whole idea of
unifying is that these the campaigns in
general have just become so become so
aggressive that the idea of you know
Democrats and Republicans ever coming
together again on any you know or people
or the whole country feeling good about
anyone who could be President I just
don't I don't see that happening going
forward I think you're going to have one
half of the country that's just furious
and you know that the template of you
know started with Obama you know the
people were hysterical on the other side
and now and now we have this with Trump
and um you know
both both sides are in this militaristic
mode and hate each other hating each
other mode and I don't know I don't
think that's good either
first I've just been asked to announce
that there's there's a couple people in
line but that's the last couple
questions and then my question is that
as a big believer that government and
policy should be deeply engaging to the
broader public is there any opportunity
to pivot here when we have sort of what
seems like unprecedented public
attention to is there a way to keep that
without continuing to appeal to the
basest interest it's a great question um
I
I thought the Sanders movement was
really amazing in a lot of ways because
Sanders also you know he was again kind
of opposite to all the things I was
talking about he he's exactly what
reporters mean when they talk about
someone being unelectable right
he doesn't look good on TV he's got a
funny speaking style he's a socialist
right and yet there was an outpouring of
support for him and when you when he
gave speeches he what did he talk about
he talked about inequality and you know
all these actual problems it was a you
know it was amazing to see America
actually tuned into this for a while um
and I thought that that was proof that
you know there there is the ability of
politicians to engage people on
something other than stupidity in this
country but you know you right now you
know it's it's hard to say I hope people
get the lessons from the Sanders thing
and say that you know being just sort of
an honest politician who makes an effort
to try to reach out to people that that
can be successful to you know is there
an opportunity for the media in
particular there to entertain more of
those discussions well if you look at
what happened with Bernie Sanders you'll
see that even though you he and Trump
were very equivalent stories actually in
a lot of ways they were they were both
rebels within their own party who were
taking on the
or at their own party structure but
Trump got 23 times the amount of
television coverage of Bernie Sanders
you had phenomena like you know an empty
mic stand whoop you know cable even
MSNBC publishing you know showing people
waiting for Trump to speak whereas when
Sanders spoke he would they wouldn't
keep the cameras on it for very long and
I think you know he was still considered
taboo in a lot of ways and I don't think
they're really past that yet so you know
I mm-hmm yeah yeah yeah exactly yeah
Trump's I met you had some negative any
deservedly negative comments about the
mainstream media I'm most concerned
about the control of information what
people can get now I'm retired I'm kind
of in the position that you were in when
you were writing and you had weeks and
weeks and weeks to do I'm I can spend
hours right looking for things and I
know how to sift through things I'm a
scientist to begin with but I'm most
concerned huh what kind of science
environmental science excellent
so I've come across things on the
internet that like for instance not not
that I agree with everything he says
Lord Monckton
is a tremendous speaker it's got
completely contrary information to what
everybody gets on the mainstream media
about climate change hmm and you don't
get any debate about that you don't see
any of that how do you what's your
advice on the people on how to sift
through what's on the Internet and to
find the good stuff so it's really
really hard these days because because
the standards really aren't good
anywhere anymore again as the business
because because we've had this huge
decline in profitability and then in the
news media for years fact-checking you
know have
it used to be in order to get anything
into print you had to go through this
whole very long process now that's
completely gone for daily Daily News
writing for magazine writing it's mostly
all gone you know it still exists in a
few places our magazine still has a
little bit of it but nowadays when
you're trying to decide whether
somebody's reputable news source or not
you're mostly relying on whether or not
that person has a track record of caring
about whether or not they're factual you
know the institutions themselves don't
really have time anymore to try to catch
everything and they don't they don't
worry about it anymore as much as they
used to so um you know I I don't I don't
know what to advise you except to say
that academic journals are tend to be
more respectable people who will link to
a primary source you know that that's
always a good sign but even things like
can be you know it's I was talking about
this with the reporter the other day in
the old days when when a member of
Congress would cite something a fact in
a prepared remark we always felt good
about using that as a fact in a story
nowadays even even members of Congress
have no problem using unsourced material
when they when they give speeches and
and so there's this epidemic of kind of
unverified stuff flying around and it's
just become really really hard so that I
think the main piece of advice is just
to read a lot on every subject and just
try to see what the most common story is
you know just one more thing on on the
published books are the publishers still
doing the fact-checking publishers do do
fact-checking but um it's not it's not
it depends on the project let's put it
that way there's there's a legal vet for
pretty much every book but the kind of
line by line thing that used to be
standard in this business and it like
you know I used to write these six and
seven thousand word features for Rolling
Stone and literally every line you know
the sky was blue this day they would
check you know was it blue that day
that doesn't happen anymore in books
they're mostly concerned about what can
we be sued for and you know what are the
major factual issues in this book and
let's just check those out but they
don't you know the little things you
know really depends on the publisher and
you know you can't you can't depend on
somebody being everything being vetted
anymore I really appreciate your
analysis of the corporate media and also
how it's not actually just about Trump
about their these systemic problems of
anti-immigration
anti-immigrant and nationalism and so
I'm wondering is there a practical way
to look at is our profitability to
talking about immigrants and say Middle
Easterners who have had traditionally in
the media kind of like a one-dimensional
perspective is there a way to reap or
tray them in part because it can help
maybe go against that tie that has been
actually set by the media historically
that and is there a way to do that in a
profitable way to entice the corporate
corporate entities to be interested in
that um it's a great question
unfortunately I would say that you know
clearly the model is hate sells and you
know discernment doesn't and if you look
back at our recent history advertisers
are terrified of being seen as for
instance you know back in 2003 2004
the cable networks made enormous
enormous sums of money promoting the
Iraq war and there was literally zero
incentive for those companies to put a
halt to the you know Islamophobia to any
any of that that's that's never going to
be a moneymaker for the network's you
know being being discerning you know I
would even say right now there's a thing
about being anti Russian that that
you know you're not going to find
anybody who is going to be willing to
kind of stand up and say hey you know
I'm pro-russian like that that's that
there's not going to be an incentive for
that I think some of the networks have
tried to do a better job of that in
their news coverage but that you know in
terms of a financial incentive you just
won't find it unfortunately so a few
final words please support us this is
this place is dedicated independent
media and it is really fulfilling to us
to see all of you in this room and we
have sanctuary resist t-shirts everyone
needs one and we just really want to
thank Matt because you're really a hero
in the movement right now and it's so
important that you're here
thank you soon